---
title: "Eduardo Duarte"
description: "Junior Software Developer & Researcher. Philonoist,
over-thinker, cinephile and music junkie."
date: "2017-09-20 18:31:00+01:00"
markup: mmark
---

## Experience

Over four years of hands-on experience with Backend Architecture,
Time-Series Analysis & Storage, Stream Processing, Smart City IoT,
Mobile & Web Frontend Development, UI/UX Design, Natural Language
Processing, and Information Retrieval. Worked extensively with
languages like Java 9, Kotlin 1.1, Javascript ES6, Swift 4 and
Objective-C, and technologies like Spring, REST, gRPC, WebSocket,
MQTT, Flink, React, Android and iOS.

Recently finished my internship at
[Ubiwhere](http://www.ubiwhere.com/en/), where I worked as a backend
developer (business process modeling and integration platform for
University of Coimbra) and a mobile developer (Android and iOS
applications for various brands like
[Vodafone](https://parking.vodafone.citibrain.com/),
[Bewegen](https://www.bewegen.pt/about/app/),
[Bikeemotion](http://www.bikeemotion.com/),
[Anacom](http://www.netmede.pt/app) and
[Prio](https://app.prioenergy.com/)).

I have co-founded two tech startups,
[Thumbeo](http://www.thumbeo.com/en/) and YouClap, where I had the
chance to act both as a creative director and a technical lead,
guiding co-workers in the development and marketing of mobile apps,
overseeing the interactive design of the final product, and devising
unique interface ideas in the consumer space.

I also have a strong background in academia: earned a Bachelor in
Information Technology (thesis graded 19 out of 20); worked with a
[Bioinformatics research group](http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/);
[published three papers](/papers/) in various fields such as
Information Security and Information Visualization; and spoken at
various conferences around the globe.


## Ethos

While only having a few years of professional experience, I've
managed to gain experience in multiple areas ranging all ends of the
development stack. I firmly believe that having a wide breadth of
understanding is vital to gain perspective in how to approach
specific challenges and to grow as an engineer.

More than simply focusing on coding, I have always pushed myself to
complete my tasks with a high standard of quality and polish,
researching best practices and bleeding edge methods. I am
enthusiastic about re-thinking and over-thinking systems to achieve
optimized solutions.


## Work with me

I am currently finishing my Master's in Software Engineering at Bosch
Thermotechnology, so I am not actively looking for a job right now,
but feel free to [send me an email](mailto:hi@edduarte.com).
