---
title: "About me"
description: "I'm Ed Duarte, a Full-Stack Software Engineer living in Zürich."
slug: "about"
hidden: true
sitemap:
  Priority: 0.9
---

Hi! I'm Ed Duarte, a Full-Stack Software Engineer from Portugal currently living in Zürich,
Switzerland. I am highly experienced in Backend Architecture, API Development, Distributed Systems
and Continuous Integration / Deployment. I also have some experience in Web & Mobile Frontend
Development.


## Experience

Currently working at SwissSign AG as a backend engineer and tech lead on a OIDC authentication
platform with qualified identity-checking and electronic signing (ZertEs-compliant), serving as the
primary authentication and doc-sign system for various third-parties in Switzerland (e.g. Swiss
Post).

Previously worked at Bosch Thermotechnology, where I developed a [scalable platform for time series
analysis and
annotation](/distributed-and-scalable-platform-for-collaborative-analysis-of-massive-time-series-data-sets/),
creating a ReactJS application and designing a distributed architecture with polyglot persistence
that handles high amounts of traffic and massive multivariate series data sets.

Before that I worked at Ubiwhere as a backend developer on a business process modeling and
integration platform for the University of Coimbra, and as a mobile developer in various Android and
iOS applications for various clients like Vodafone, Anacom (Portugal's national regulatory authority
for the communications sector) and Prio Energy (fourth largest fuel company in Portugal). Around the
same time I was also a co-founder of two small tech startups, where I had the chance to lead the
development of various Android and iOS apps and oversee the UX design of the final product.

I also have a strong background in academia: earned a Master's degree in Software Engineering and a
Bachelor's in Information Technology; was awarded a research scholarship to work with a
bioinformatics research group and a marine conservation center; and [published five
papers](/publications/) in various fields, including Distributed Systems, Data Analysis, Information
Visualization and Information Security.


## Ethos

Throughout my entire career, I have been very lucky to work in ambitious projects with fantastic
people, assimilating experience from various domains ranging all aspects of the product development
life cycle.

I am enthusiastic about re-thinking and over-thinking systems to achieve optimized solutions. I
firmly believe that having a wide breadth of understanding is vital to gain perspective when
approaching specific challenges and to grow as an engineer. More than simply focusing on coding, I
have always pushed myself to complete my tasks with a high standard of quality and polish, applying
best practices and researching bleeding edge methods.


## Interested?

Feel free to [say hi](mailto:hi@edduarte.com)!

